20 useful proverbs all english speakers should know

1. The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence.
: ‘The grass is always greener” is a proverb that teaches us it’s not good to be jealous (to want what other people have). It may seem like everyone around you has “greener grass,” meaning nicer cars, better jobs, etc. But your neighbor probably thinks you have greener grass too, which means that your friends and other people think that you have better looks, a happier family, etc. So instead of thinking about what everyone else has, this proverb wants you to be thankful for what you have.

2. Don’t judge a book by its cover.
: Things are not always what they seem. This proverb teaches you not to make judgments about other people because of how they look or dress. A book with a boring or plain cover could be amazing. The same is true with people. A person might look like an athlete or fool, but there is probably a lot more to them than clothes suggest.

3. Strike while the iron is hot.
: This old expression comes from the days of blacksmiths (people who work with metal). To shape the metal, the blacksmith would have to beat it with a hammer. Iron is easier to work with when it’s hot. This proverb means you should take advantage of the moment. If an opportunity presents itself to you, take it! Take action because the chance may not come again.

4. Too many cooks spoil the broth.
: Or as it’s more commonly said, “Too many cooks in the kitchen.” This is a well known experience—a lot people all trying to work in a kitchen around a small table or stovetop will make a mess and ruin the food. This proverb talks about the trouble of too many people trying to do the same thing at once.

5. You can’t have your cake and eat it too.
: If you eat your cake, you won’t have it anymore, will you? So you can’t do both. This proverb is about having two opposite desires, and how it’s impossible to get both. Its meaning is similar to the proverb, “You can’t have the best of both worlds.”

6. Many hands make light work.
: If a lot of people carry a heavy object, it does not feel heavy. That is the general meaning of this proverb. If everyone works together to complete something—like cleaning, painting or group projects—then each person has less to do. More importantly, the job will be completed much more quickly.

7. When in Rome, do as the Romans do.
: When you are a visitor somewhere away from home, you should act like everyone else. It is polite to do so, and could keep you from getting into trouble. This proverb is from the ancient days of the Roman Empire when the capital city had visitors from all over the world. Cultures were very different between cities in those times. But while in Rome, one would behave like a Roman, no matter where you came from.

8. Don’t cross the bridge until you come to it.
: This proverb tells you not to worry so much! Problems will certainly come in the future. But what can be done about that now? It’s better to think about what you are doing right now—without worrying about the unknown—and take care of issues when they happen.

9. Honesty is the best policy.
: Lying a lot can be difficult, because you might forget your lies. Soon enough, someone will find out you are lying. Then, you are in trouble. Or even if no one ever finds out, you will feel guilty for not telling the truth. But if you are honest and tell the truth, people will believe you and respect you. You will earn their trust and sleep well at night.

10. Practice makes perfect.
: It would be amazing if the first time you picked up a guitar you could play it like a rock star. Or if the first time you got in a car, you could drive like a professional. Or if you could speak English perfectly after one lesson. Everything is difficult when you are a beginner. But if you stick with it, if you keep practicing, you can master anything.

11. Where there’s a will, there’s a way.
: This proverb is said to encourage people who want to give up. Sometimes, we face problems that seem impossible. But if you want it bad enough, nothing can stand in your way. That is what this proverb means—if you have the will to meet the problems that are in front of you, there is a way to overcome them.

12. Look before you leap.
: Don’t rush into things! Make sure you know what is going to happen next. You would not jump off a cliff without first checking how far the ground is below or what there is to land on. You should wait a few moments and make sure it’s a good idea to jump from that cliff. So when making a big “jump” in life, make sure you’ve looked at the situation and really understand it before you take a big action.

13. Beggars can’t be choosers.
: If someone gives you free things or offers to help you do something, you can’t ask for a different color or choose the perfect time in your schedule. When you receive free help or goods, you should accept what you’re offered—you can’t be picky (a “chooser”) because you’re not paying!

14. Don’t make a mountain out of an anthill.
: People sometimes get very upset over small problems. This proverb reminds you to take a moment and see how important (or not important) the issue is. Messing up your laundry or being late for work is not very important when you consider your entire life. So it’s important to stay calm and not get angry about tiny problems.

15. An apple a day keeps the doctor away.
: An apple is full of Vitamin C, which keeps you healthy. However, the “apple” in this proverb means eating healthy in general. If you eat well and your diet includes a lot of fruits and vegetables, there will be no need to visit the doctor.

16. The early bird catches the worm.
: This proverb is a lot like the phrase “first come, first served.” It simply means that it’s usually best to be early. If you arrive earlier—whether it’s to a clothing store, restaurant, conference, etc.—you will have the best options to choose from. If you come later, though, the best clothes could have sold out, the restaurant could be full and have a long waiting time, etc.

17. Better late than never.
: While being the early bird is the best, even latecomers may get something for coming. It would be a lot worse if they never came at all. This proverb is said about ending fights with people. It’s better to apologize and make up years later, than to never resolve your fight at all.

18. The cat is out of the bag.
: This proverb means that a secret has been told. It comes from the Middle Ages and was common advice given in the market. You may have thought you purchased a tasty pig, but the seller put a simple cat in the bag instead. To “let the cat out of the bag” was to reveal the seller’s trick.

19. Two wrongs don’t make a right.
: If somebody insults you or harms you (“a wrong”), doing the same to them (“two wrongs”) will not make everything okay. It will most likely cause a back-and-forth fight without end. If somebody is mean to you, don’t be mean to them in return because it’s not right to do so.

20. Always put your best foot forward.
: When you are starting on a project or a journey, it’s best to start with a good attitude and a lot of energy. First impressions (what people think about you when they meet you for the first time) can last for a long time. That’s why this proverb is also used when meeting new people or for job interviews. Having a positive attitude—your “best foot”—is the best way to make a good impression.
